INSTALL.md, before:

### INSTALLATION GUIDE

At this time sqlChain is only tested on Linux servers. It may work on other platforms but I don't have them to test and probably won't put effort into that in the near future. 

There is a new sqlchain-init script that handles most of the configuration and DB init details. 

Tested on a clean Ubuntu 14.04 Amazon EC2 instance (ami-feed08e8). I used a spot m4.large instance which costs only 1.4 cents/hour to test (plus data transfer out, which seems to be pretty substanial, and maybe the main cost). 

### Getting Started - Step by Step

First, you need Bitcoin Core and some standard Ubuntu packages for MySQL and Python.

```
sudo apt-get install software-properties-common python-software-properties libev-dev libevent-dev   # may not need but won't hurt
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:bitcoin/bitcoin
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install bitcoind mysql-server libmysqlclient-dev python-pip python-dev build-essential
```

Then you can install sqlChain from PyPi the easy way, includes dependencies and demo API web pages.

    sudo pip install sqlchain

That creates binaries in /usr/local/bin and puts python stuff where it should normally go.

The easy way to create the DB and configure and co-ordinate both bitcoin core and sqlchain daemons:

    sudo sqlchain-init
    
Answer the questions and it will create a user, mysql db and config files with correct permissions in locations you indicate. There are defaults for everything so you can get by with hitting 'Enter' the whole way thru. It also can be run again to change options but does not remove old files. It won't clobber the database either - you have to do that manually. It will create some demo api/web server files which you can build upon.

Finally, try starting the daemons, one at a time at first (this uses the upstart init process, which also starts them at boot). On Ubuntu > 14.04 use `systemctl start` instead.

```
sudo start bitcoin
sudo start sqlchain
sudo start sqlchain-api
```

If the process doesn't seem to start you can check in /var/log/upstart/ for logs upstart makes when something goes wrong (Ubuntu > 14.04, use `systemctl status`). If a process starts but has other issues you can monitor them in their log files, by default directories as below,

```
/var/data/bitcoin/debug.log
/var/data/sqlchain/daemon.log
/var/data/sqlchain/api.log
```

If you happen to install MySQL version >= 5.7.5 you may get start up errors related to ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY. I solved this by adding the following setting in my my.cnf (or preferrably /etc/mysql/conf.d/bitcoin.cnf where you can put other optimized settings) which just removes the new ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY default value. Then restart MySQL server.

```
sql_mode="STRICT_TRANS_TABLES,NO_ZERO_IN_DATE,NO_ZERO_DATE,ERROR_FOR_DIVISION_BY_ZERO,NO_AUTO_CREATE_USER,NO_ENGINE_SUBSTITUTION"
```

You can add your normal user to the sqlchain/bitcoin group (by default "btc"),

    sudo adduser <myuser> btc
    
That allows you to use the config files easily, such as when using bitcoin-cli. It's also useful to have some aliases for common tasks. You can throw these in your .bashrc so they are present on login.

```
alias btc='bitcoin-cli -conf=/etc/bitcoin/bitcoin.conf'
alias sqdlog='sudo less /var/data/sqlchain/daemon.log'
```

### Updating

If you want to update sqlchain as I implement or fix stuff,

    sudo pip install --upgrade sqlchain
    
should do the trick. Bitcoin will get updated by the Ubuntu PPA package system (unless you do a custom build for manual pruning).

### Pruning Mode

If you select "pruning" mode in the sqlchain-init questions then it will send rpc calls to bitcoin to let it know when a block is processed. Bitcoin prunes in "block file units", each one being ~128MB. So when sqlchaind has completed all blocks in a given block file it is deleted. The pruning only works in manual mode and this is available in bitcoind >= 0.14.1 (otherwise you need to custom build bitcoind).

### Testnet

You can use sqlchain with Bitcoin testnet. Just update bitcoin.conf with `testnet=1` and sqlchaind.cfg:
  
- update rpc port to 18332 instead of 8332
- if using blkdat mode be sure blkdat path includes testnet3 subdirectory

I haven't tested this much yet but expect to do more when I test the electrum server.

### Other Details

You should probably create an optimized my.cnf override file in /etc/mysql/conf.d/bitcoin.cnf which has values suited to your system. For example I use below with 8 GB RAM and it seems to improve speed (but don't claim this is optimal). The latest versions of MySQL seem to also add a mysql.conf.d directory and order of configuration is non-deterministic so you may need to play with the cnf location and name while checking how variables get set. This bizarre and confusing cnf loading wasn't a problem for me in earlier versions; call it progress.

    #optimized for bitcoin database using values from mysqltuner.pl adjusted for other uses
    [mysqld]
    ignore-builtin-innodb
    default-storage-engine = myisam
    key_buffer_size=6000M
    query_cache_type=0
    
    tmp_table_size=32M
    max_heap_table_size=32M

By default the API server (sqlchain-api) listens on localhost:8085 but of course a simple edit of sqlchain-api.cfg allows changing that. For example, to listen on the normal public port, assuming root privileges (when started as root it will drop to chosen user after):

    "listen":"0.0.0.0:80",
    
You can also set an SSL certificate file to use if you want to serve https. I would suggest for public access it's better to use nginx as a reverse proxy. It's fairly easy to setup and better for several reasons, one being secure certificate handling. But, you can edit the sqlchain-api.cfg and add:

    "ssl":"path/to/full-chain-certificate-file",
    "key":"path/to/private-key-file",     (optional: don't set if you use a combined key+cert in above)
    
This could be a file with concatenated private key and certificate blocks, or separate files. It should have read-only permissions; due to how python handles ssl it needs to be readable by the running user.

A simple proxy config for nginx is below. You could have several api servers behind nginx and it can load balance across them. 

    server {
        listen 80;
        listen [::]:80;
        listen 443 ssl http2;
        listen [::]:443 ssl http2;
        server_name example.com www.example.com;
    
        ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem;
        ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem;
        ssl_protocols TLSv1 TLSv1.1 TLSv1.2;
    
        location / {
            proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
            proxy_set_header Host $http_host;
            proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
            proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8085;
        }
    }

It is also probably better for serving static content and only passing api calls to sqlchain-api, in which case use a blank www in sqlchain-api.cfg to disable root files. eg.

    "www":"",

The sqlchain-api "dbinfo" cfg option sets whether db state queries are run and at what interval: -1 = never, 0 = at start only, >0 minute interval. The db info output is available as an API call. So the following will refresh info every 10 minutes.

    "dbinfo":10,

Any questions or suggestions - post issues on GitHub.

Commit message:

add vultr link to install guide

INSTALL.md, after:

### INSTALLATION GUIDE

At this time sqlChain is only tested on Linux servers. It may work on other platforms but I don't have them to test and probably won't put effort into that in the near future. 

There is a new sqlchain-init script that handles most of the configuration and DB init details. 

Tested on a clean Ubuntu 14.04 Amazon EC2 instance (ami-feed08e8). I used a spot m4.large instance which costs only 1.4 cents/hour to test (plus data transfer out, which seems to be pretty substanial, and maybe the main cost). 

A better test platform is [Vultr.com](http://www.vultr.com/?ref=7087266) and they also accept Bitcoin payments. Faster and cheaper, though not quite as advanced block storage and scripting. If you try it then please use my [affiliate link](http://www.vultr.com/?ref=7087266) - gives me a some much needed server credit for testing.

### Getting Started - Step by Step

First, you need Bitcoin Core and some standard Ubuntu packages for MySQL and Python.

```
sudo apt-get install software-properties-common python-software-properties libev-dev libevent-dev   # may not need but won't hurt
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:bitcoin/bitcoin
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install bitcoind mysql-server libmysqlclient-dev python-pip python-dev build-essential
```

Then you can install sqlChain from PyPi the easy way, includes dependencies and demo API web pages.

    sudo pip install sqlchain

That creates binaries in /usr/local/bin and puts python stuff where it should normally go.

The easy way to create the DB and configure and co-ordinate both bitcoin core and sqlchain daemons:

    sudo sqlchain-init
    
Answer the questions and it will create a user, mysql db and config files with correct permissions in locations you indicate. There are defaults for everything so you can get by with hitting 'Enter' the whole way thru. It also can be run again to change options but does not remove old files. It won't clobber the database either - you have to do that manually. It will create some demo api/web server files which you can build upon.

Finally, try starting the daemons, one at a time at first (this uses the upstart init process, which also starts them at boot). On Ubuntu > 14.04 use `systemctl start` instead.

```
sudo start bitcoin
sudo start sqlchain
sudo start sqlchain-api
```

If the process doesn't seem to start you can check in /var/log/upstart/ for logs upstart makes when something goes wrong (Ubuntu > 14.04, use `systemctl status`). If a process starts but has other issues you can monitor them in their log files, by default directories as below,

```
/var/data/bitcoin/debug.log
/var/data/sqlchain/daemon.log
/var/data/sqlchain/api.log
```

If you happen to install MySQL version >= 5.7.5 you may get start up errors related to ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY. I solved this by adding the following setting in my my.cnf (or preferrably /etc/mysql/conf.d/bitcoin.cnf where you can put other optimized settings) which just removes the new ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY default value. Then restart MySQL server.

```
sql_mode="STRICT_TRANS_TABLES,NO_ZERO_IN_DATE,NO_ZERO_DATE,ERROR_FOR_DIVISION_BY_ZERO,NO_AUTO_CREATE_USER,NO_ENGINE_SUBSTITUTION"
```

You can add your normal user to the sqlchain/bitcoin group (by default "btc"),

    sudo adduser <myuser> btc
    
That allows you to use the config files easily, such as when using bitcoin-cli. It's also useful to have some aliases for common tasks. You can throw these in your .bashrc so they are present on login.

```
alias btc='bitcoin-cli -conf=/etc/bitcoin/bitcoin.conf'
alias sqdlog='sudo less /var/data/sqlchain/daemon.log'
```

### Updating

If you want to update sqlchain as I implement or fix stuff,

    sudo pip install --upgrade sqlchain
    
should do the trick. Bitcoin will get updated by the Ubuntu PPA package system (unless you do a custom build for manual pruning).

### Pruning Mode

If you select "pruning" mode in the sqlchain-init questions then it will send rpc calls to bitcoin to let it know when a block is processed. Bitcoin prunes in "block file units", each one being ~128MB. So when sqlchaind has completed all blocks in a given block file it is deleted. The pruning only works in manual mode and this is available in bitcoind >= 0.14.1 (otherwise you need to custom build bitcoind).

### Testnet

You can use sqlchain with Bitcoin testnet. Just update bitcoin.conf with `testnet=1` and sqlchaind.cfg:
  
- update rpc port to 18332 instead of 8332
- if using blkdat mode be sure blkdat path includes testnet3 subdirectory

I haven't tested this much yet but expect to do more when I test the electrum server.

### Other Details

You should probably create an optimized my.cnf override file in /etc/mysql/conf.d/bitcoin.cnf which has values suited to your system. For example I use below with 8 GB RAM and it seems to improve speed (but don't claim this is optimal). The latest versions of MySQL seem to also add a mysql.conf.d directory and order of configuration is non-deterministic so you may need to play with the cnf location and name while checking how variables get set. This bizarre and confusing cnf loading wasn't a problem for me in earlier versions; call it progress.

    #optimized for bitcoin database using values from mysqltuner.pl adjusted for other uses
    [mysqld]
    ignore-builtin-innodb
    default-storage-engine = myisam
    key_buffer_size=6000M
    query_cache_type=0
    
    tmp_table_size=32M
    max_heap_table_size=32M

By default the API server (sqlchain-api) listens on localhost:8085 but of course a simple edit of sqlchain-api.cfg allows changing that. For example, to listen on the normal public port, assuming root privileges (when started as root it will drop to chosen user after):

    "listen":"0.0.0.0:80",
    
You can also set an SSL certificate file to use if you want to serve https. I would suggest for public access it's better to use nginx as a reverse proxy. It's fairly easy to setup and better for several reasons, one being secure certificate handling. But, you can edit the sqlchain-api.cfg and add:

    "ssl":"path/to/full-chain-certificate-file",
    "key":"path/to/private-key-file",     (optional: don't set if you use a combined key+cert in above)
    
This could be a file with concatenated private key and certificate blocks, or separate files. It should have read-only permissions; due to how python handles ssl it needs to be readable by the running user.

A simple proxy config for nginx is below. You could have several api servers behind nginx and it can load balance across them. 

    server {
        listen 80;
        listen [::]:80;
        listen 443 ssl http2;
        listen [::]:443 ssl http2;
        server_name example.com www.example.com;
    
        ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem;
        ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem;
        ssl_protocols TLSv1 TLSv1.1 TLSv1.2;
    
        location / {
            proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
            proxy_set_header Host $http_host;
            proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
            proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8085;
        }
    }

It is also probably better for serving static content and only passing api calls to sqlchain-api, in which case use a blank www in sqlchain-api.cfg to disable root files. eg.

    "www":"",

The sqlchain-api "dbinfo" cfg option sets whether db state queries are run and at what interval: -1 = never, 0 = at start only, >0 minute interval. The db info output is available as an API call. So the following will refresh info every 10 minutes.

    "dbinfo":10,

Any questions or suggestions - post issues on GitHub.
